
(Mr. Annandale's case.)]

Belonging to this group also is a form of _congenital elephantiasis_
resulting from the circular constriction of a limb _in utero_ by
amniotic bands.

_Elephantiasis occurring apart from lymphatic or venous obstruction_ is
illustrated by _elephantiasis nervorum_, in which there is an overgrowth
of the skin and cellular tissue of an extremity in association with
neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves (Fig. 89); and by
_elephantiasis Graecorum_--a form of leprosy in which the skin of the
face becomes the seat of tumour-like masses consisting of leprous
nodules. It is also illustrated by _elephantiasis involving the scrotum_
as a result of prolonged irritation by the urine in cases in which the
penis has been amputated and the urine has infiltrated the scrotal
tissues over a period of years.

#Sebaceous Cysts.#--Atheromatous cysts or wens are formed in relation to
the sebaceous glands and hair follicles. They are commonly met with in
adults, on the scalp (Fig. 99), face, neck, back, and external genitals.
Sometimes they are multiple, and they may be met with in several members
of the same family. They are smooth, rounded, or discoid cysts, varying
in size from a split-pea to a Tangerine orange. In consistence they are
firm and elastic, or fluctuating, and are incorporated with the
overlying skin, but movable on the deeper structures. The orifice of the
partly blocked sebaceous follicle is sometimes visible, and the contents
of the cyst can be squeezed through the opening. The wall of the cyst is
composed of a connective-tissue capsule lined by stratified squamous
epithelium. The contents consist of accumulated epithelial cells, and
are at first dry and pearly white in appearance, but as a result of
fatty degeneration they break down into a greyish-yellow pultaceous and
semi-fluid material having a peculiar stale odour. It is probable that
the decomposition of the contents is the result of the presence of
bacteria, and that from the surgical point of view they should be
regarded as infective. A sebaceous cyst may remain indefinitely without
change, or may slowly increase in size, the skin over it becoming
stretched and closely adherent to the cyst wall as a result of friction
and pressure. The contents may ooze from the orifice of the duct and dry
on the skin surface, leading to the formation of a sebaceous horn
(Fig. 100). As a result of injury the cyst may undergo sudden
enlargement from haemorrhage into its interior.

Recurrent attacks of inflammation frequently occur, especially in wens
of the face and scalp. Suppuration may ensue and be followed by cure of
the cyst, or an offensive fungating ulcer forms which may be mistaken
for epithelioma. True cancerous transformation is rare.

Wens are to be _diagnosed_ from dermoids, from fatty tumours, and from
cold abscesses. Dermoids usually appear before adult life, and as they
nearly always lie beneath the fascia, the skin is movable over them. A
fatty tumour is movable, and is often lobulated. The confusion with a
cold abscess is most likely to occur in wens of the neck or back, and it
may be impossible without the use of an exploring needle to
differentiate between them.

[Illustration: FIG. 99.--Multiple Sebaceous Cysts or Wens; the larger
ones are of many years' duration.]

_Treatment._--The removal of wens is to be recommended while they are
small and freely movable, as they are then easily shelled out after
incising the overlying skin; sometimes splitting the cyst makes its
removal easier. Local anaesthesia is to be preferred. It is important
that none of the cyst wall be left behind. In large and adherent wens an
ellipse of skin is removed along with the cyst. When inflamed, it may be
impossible to dissect out the cyst, and the wall should be destroyed
with carbolic acid, the resulting wound being treated by the open
method.

#Moles.#--The term mole is applied to a pigmented, and usually hairy,
patch of skin, present at or appearing shortly after birth. The colour
varies from brown to black, according to the amount of melanin pigment
present. The lesion consists in an overgrowth of epidermis which often
presents an alveolar arrangement. Moles vary greatly in size: some are
mere dots, others are as large as the palm of the hand, and occasionally
a mole covers half the face. In addition to being unsightly, they bleed
freely when abraded, are liable to ulcerate from friction and pressure,
and occasionally become the starting-point of melanotic cancer. Rodent
cancer sometimes originates in the slightly pigmented moles met with on
the face. Overgrowths in relation to the cutaneous nerves, especially
the plexiform neuroma, occasionally originate in pigmented moles. Soldau
believes that the pigmentation and overgrowth of the epidermis in moles
are associated with, and probably result from, a fibromatosis of the
cutaneous nerves.

_Treatment._--The quickest way to get rid of a mole is to excise it; if
the edges of the gap cannot be brought together with sutures, recourse
should be had to grafting. In large hairy moles of the face whose size
forbids excision, radium or the X-rays should be employed. Excellent
results have been obtained by refrigeration with solid carbon dioxide.
In children and women with delicate skin, applications of from ten to
thirty seconds suffice. In persons with coarse skin an application of
one minute may be necessary, and it may have to be repeated.

#Horns.#--The _sebaceous_ horn results from the accumulation of the
dried contents of a wen on the surface of the skin: the sebaceous
material after drying up becomes cornified, and as fresh material is
added to the base the horn increases in length (Fig. 100). The _wart_
horn grows from a warty papilloma of the skin. _Cicatrix_ horns are
formed by the heaping up of epidermis in the scars that result from
burns. _Nail_ horns are overgrown nails (keratomata of the nail bed),
and are met with chiefly in the great toe of elderly bedridden patients.
If an ulcer forms at the base of a horn, it may prove the starting-point
of epithelioma, and for this reason, as well as for others, horns should
be removed.

[Illustration: FIG. 100.--Sebaceous Horn growing from Auricle.

(Dr. Kenneth Maclachan's case.)]

#New Growths in the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue.#--The _Angioma_ has
been described with diseases of blood vessels. _Fibroma._--Various types
of fibroma occur in the skin. A soft pedunculated fibroma, about the
size of a pea, is commonly met with, especially on the neck and trunk;
it is usually solitary, and is easily removed with scissors. The
multiple, soft fibroma known as _molluscum fibrosum_, which depends upon
a neuro-fibromatosis of the cutaneous nerves, is described with the
tumours of nerves. Hard fibromas occurring singly or in groups may be
met with, especially in the skin of the buttock, and may present a local
malignancy, recurring after removal like the "recurrent fibroid" of
Paget. The "painful subcutaneous nodule" is a solitary fibroma related
to one of the cutaneous nerves. The hard fibroma known as _keloid_ is
described with the affections of scars.

#Papilloma.#--The _common wart_ or verruca is an outgrowth of the
surface epidermis. It may be sessile or pedunculated hard or soft. The
surface may be smooth, or fissured and foliated like a cauliflower, or
it may be divided up into a number of spines. Warts are met with chiefly
on the hands, and are often multiple, occurring in clusters or in
successive crops. Multiple warts appear to result from some contagion,
the nature of which is unknown; they sometimes occur in an epidemic form
among school-children, and show a remarkable tendency to disappear
spontaneously. The solitary flat-topped wart which occurs on the face
of old people may, if irritated, become the seat of epithelioma. A warty
growth of the epidermis is a frequent accompaniment of moles and of that
variety of lupus known as _lupus verrucosus_.

_Treatment._--In the multiple warts of children the health should be
braced up by a change to the seaside. A dusting-powder, consisting of
boracic acid with 5 per cent. salicylic acid, may be rubbed into the
hands after washing and drying. The persistent warts of young adults
should be excised after freezing with chloride of ethyl. When cutting is
objected to, they may be painted night and morning with salicylic
collodion, the epidermis being dehydrated with alcohol before each
application.

_Venereal warts_ occur on the genitals of either sex, and may form large
cauliflower-like masses on the inner surface of the prepuce or of the
labia majora. Although frequently co-existing with gonorrhoea or
syphilis, they occur independently of these diseases, being probably
acquired by contact with another individual suffering from warts
(C. W. Cathcart). They give rise to considerable irritation and
suffering, and when cleanliness is neglected there may be an offensive
discharge.

In the female, the cauliflower-like masses are dissected from the labia;
in the male, the prepuce is removed and the warts on the glans are
snipped off with scissors. In milder cases, the warts usually disappear
if the parts are kept absolutely dry and clean. A useful dusting-powder
is one consisting of calamine and 5 per cent. salicylic acid; the
exsiccated sulphate of iron, in the form of a powder, may be employed in
cases which resist this treatment.

#Adenoma.#--This is a comparatively rare tumour growing from the glands
of the skin. One variety, known as the "tomato tumour," which apparently
originates from _the sweat glands_, is met with on the scalp and face in
women past middle life. These growths are often multiple; the individual
tumours vary in size, and the skin, which is almost devoid of hairs, is
glistening and tightly stretched over them. A similar tumour may occur
on the nose. The _sebaceous adenoma_, which originates from the
sebaceous glands, forms a projecting tumour on the face or scalp, and
when the skin is irritated it may ulcerate and fungate. The treatment
consists in the removal of the tumour along with the overlying skin.

The exuberant masses on the nose known as "rhinophyma," "lipoma nasi,"
or "potato nose" are of the nature of sebaceous adenoma, and are removed
by shaving them off with a knife until the normal shape of the nose is
restored Healing takes place with remarkable rapidity.

#Cancer.#--There are several types of primary cancer of the skin, the
most important being squamous epithelioma, rodent cancer, and melanotic
cancer.

a mole covers half the face. In addition to being unsightly, they bleed
[Illustration: FIG. 101.--Paraffin Epithelioma.]

#Epithelioma# occurs in a variety of forms. When originating in a small
ulcer or wart-for example on the face in old people--it presents the
features of a chronic indurated ulcer. A more exuberant and rapidly
growing form of epithelial cancer, described by Hutchinson as the
_crateriform ulcer_, commences on the face as a small red pimple which
rapidly develops into an elevated mass shaped like a bee-hive, and
breaks down in the centre. Epithelioma may develop anywhere on the body
in relation to long-standing ulcers, especially that resulting from a
burn or from lupus; this form usually presents an exuberant outgrowth of
epidermis not unlike a cauliflower. An interesting example of
epithelioma has been described by Neve of Kashmir. The natives in that
province are in the habit of carrying a fire-basket suspended from the
waist, which often burns the skin and causes a chronic ulcer, and many
of these ulcers become the seat of epithelioma, due, in Neve's opinion,
to the actual contact of the sooty pan with the skin.

The term _trade epithelioma_ has been applied to that form met with in
those who follow certain occupations, such as paraffin workers and
chimney-sweeps. The most recent member of this group is the _X-ray
carcinoma_, which is met with in those who are constantly exposed to the
irritation of the X-rays; there is first a chronic dermatitis with warty
overgrowth of the surface epithelium, pigmentation, and the formation of
fissures and warts. The trade epithelioma varies a good deal in
malignancy, but it tends to cause death in the same manner as other
epitheliomas.

Epithelial cancer has also been observed in those who have taken arsenic
over long periods for medicinal purposes.

[Illustration: FIG. 102.--Rodent Cancer of Inner Canthus.]

#Rodent Cancer# (Rodent Ulcer).--This is a cancer originating in the
sweat glands or sebaceous follicles, or in the foetal residues of
cutaneous glands. The cells are small and closely packed together in
alveoli or in reticulated columns; cell nests are rare. It is remarkably
constant in its seat of origin, being nearly always located on the
lateral aspect of the nose or in the vicinity of the lower eyelid
(Fig. 102). It is rare on the trunk or limbs. It commences as a small
flattened nodule in the skin, the epidermis over it being stretched and
shining. The centre becomes depressed, while the margins extend in the
form of an elevated ridge. Sooner or later the epidermis gives way in
the centre, exposing a smooth raw surface devoid of granulations.

[Illustration: FIG. 103.--Rodent Cancer of fifteen years' duration,
which has destroyed the contents of the Orbit.

(Sir Montagu Cotterill's case)]

The margin, while in parts irregular, is typically represented by a
well-defined "rolled" border which consists of the peripheral portion of
the cancer that has not broken down. The central ulcer may temporarily
heal. There is itching but little pain, and the condition progresses
extremely slowly; rodent cancers which have existed for many years are
frequently met with. The disease attacks and destroys every structure
with which it comes in contact, such as the eyelids, the walls of the
nasal cavities, and the bones of the face; hence it may produce the most
hideous deformities (Fig. 103). The patient may succumb to haemorrhage or
to infective complications such as erysipelas or meningitis.

Secondary growths in the lymph glands, while not unknown, are extremely
rare. We have only seen them once--in a case of rodent cancer in the
groin.

_Diagnosis._--Lupus is the disease most often mistaken for rodent
cancer. Lupus usually begins earlier in life, it presents apple-jelly
nodules, and lacks the rounded, elevated border. Syphilitic lesions
progress more rapidly, and also lack the characteristic margin. The
differentiation from squamous epithelioma is of considerable importance,
as the latter affection spreads more rapidly, involves the lymph glands
early, and is much more dangerous to life.

_Treatment._--In rodent cancers of limited size--say less than one inch
in diameter--free excision is the most rapid and certain method of
treatment. The alternative is the application of radium or of the
Rontgen rays, which, although requiring many exposures, results in cure
with the minimum of disfigurement. If the cancer already covers an
extensive area, or has invaded the cavity of the orbit or nose, radium
or X-rays yield the best results. The effect is soon shown by the
ingrowth of healthy epithelium from the surrounding skin, and at the
same time the discharge is lessened. Good results are also reported from
the application of carbon dioxide snow, especially when this follows
upon a course of X-ray treatment.

#Paget's disease# of the nipple is an epithelioma occurring in women
over forty years of age: a similar form of epithelioma is sometimes met
with at the umbilicus or on the genitals.

#Melanotic Cancer.#--Under this head are included all new growths which
contain an excess of melanin pigment. Many of these were formerly
described as melanotic sarcoma. They nearly always originate in a
pigmented mole which has been subjected to irritation. The primary
growth may remain so small that its presence is not even suspected, or
it may increase in size, ulcerate, and fungate. The amount of pigment
varies: when small in amount the growth is brown, when abundant it is a
deep black. The most remarkable feature is the rapidity with which the
disease becomes disseminated along the lymphatics, the first evidence of
which is an enlargement of the lymph glands. As the primary growth is
often situated on the sole of the foot or in the matrix of the nail of
the great toe, the femoral and inguinal glands become enlarged in
succession, forming tumours much larger than the primary growth.
Sometimes the dissemination involves the lymph vessels of the limb,
forming a series of indurated pigmented cords and nodules (Fig. 104).
Lastly, the dissemination may be universal throughout the body, and this
usually occurs at a comparatively early stage. The secondary growths are
deeply pigmented, being usually of a coal-black colour, and melanin
pigment may be present in the urine. When recurrence takes place in or
near the scar left by the operation, the cancer nodules are not
necessarily pigmented.

[Illustration: FIG. 104.--Diffuse Melanotic Cancer of Lymphatics of Skin
secondary to a Growth in the Sole of the Foot.]

To extirpate the disease it is necessary to excise the tumour, with a
zone of healthy skin around it and a somewhat large zone of the
underlying subcutaneous tissue and deep fascia. Hogarth Pringle
recommends that a broad strip of subcutaneous fascia up to and including
the nearest anatomical group of glands should be removed with the tumour
in one continuous piece.

#Secondary Cancer of the Skin.#--Cancer may spread to the skin from a
subjacent growth by direct continuity or by way of the lymphatics. Both
of these processes are so well illustrated in cases of mammary cancer
that they will be described in relation to that disease.

#Sarcoma# of various types is met with in the skin. The fibroma, after
excision, may recur as a fibro-sarcoma. The alveolar sarcoma commences
as a hard lump and increases in size until the epidermis gives way and
an ulcer is formed.

[Illustration: FIG. 105.--Melanotic Cancer of Forehead with Metastases
in Lymph Vessels and Glands.

(Mr. D. P. D. Wilkie's case.)]

A number of fresh tumours may spring up around the original growth.
Sometimes the primary growth appears in the form of multiple nodules
which tend to become confluent. Excision, unless performed early, is of
little avail, and in any case should be followed up by exposure to
radium.


AFFECTIONS OF CICATRICES

A cicatrix or scar consists of closely packed bundles of white fibres
covered by epidermis; the skin glands and hair follicles are usually
absent. The size, shape, and level of the cicatrix depend upon the
conditions which preceded healing.

A healthy scar, when recently formed, has a smooth, glossy surface of a
pinkish colour, which tends to become whiter as a result of obliteration
of the blood vessels concerned in its formation.

_Weak Scars._--A scar is said to be weak when it readily breaks down as
a result of irritation or pressure. The scars resulting from severe
burns and those over amputation stumps are especially liable to break
down from trivial causes. The treatment is to excise the weak portion of
the scar and bring the edges of the gap together.

_Contracted scars_ frequently cause deformity either by displacing
parts, such as the eyelid or lip, or by fixing parts and preventing the
normal movements--for example, a scar on the flexor aspect of a joint
may prevent extension of the forearm (Fig. 63). These are treated by
dividing the scar, correcting the deformity, and filling up the gap with
epithelial grafts, or with a flap of the whole thickness of the skin.
When deformity results from _depression of a scar_, as is not uncommon
after the healing of a sinus, the treatment is to excise the scar.
Depressed scars may be raised by the injection of paraffin into the
subcutaneous tissue.

_Painful Scars._--Pain in relation to a scar is usually due to nerve
fibres being compressed or stretched in the cicatricial tissue; and in
some cases to ascending neuritis. The treatment consists in excising the
scar or in stretching or excising a portion of the nerve affected.

_Pigmented or Discoloured Scars._--The best-known examples are the blue
coloration which results from coal-dust or gunpowder, the brown scars
resulting from chronic ulcer with venous congestion of the leg, and the
variously coloured scars caused by tattooing. The only satisfactory
method of getting rid of the coloration is to excise the scar; the edges
are brought together by sutures, or the raw surface is covered with
skin-grafts according to the size of the gap.

_Hypertrophied Scars._--Scars occasionally broaden out and become
prominent, and on exposed parts this may prove a source of
disappointment after operations such as those for goitre or tuberculous
glands in the neck. There is sometimes considerable improvement from
exposure to the X-rays.

_Keloid._--This term is applied to an overgrowth of scar tissue which
extends beyond the area of the original wound, and the name is derived
from the fact that this extension occurs in the form of radiating
processes, suggesting the claws of a crab. It is essentially a fibroma
or new growth of fibrous tissue, which commences in relation to the
walls of the smaller blood vessels; the bundles of fibrous tissue are
for the most part parallel with the surface, and the epidermis is
tightly stretched over them. It is more frequent in the negro and in
those who are, or have been, the subjects of tuberculous disease.

[Illustration: FIG. 106.--Recurrent Keloid in scar left by operation for
tuberculous glands in a girl aet. 7.]

Keloid may attack scars of any kind, such as those resulting from
leech-bites, acne pustules, boils or blisters; those resulting from
operation or accidental wounds; and the scars resulting from burns,
especially when situated over the sternum, appear to be specially
liable. The scar becomes more and more conspicuous, is elevated above
the surface, of a pinkish or brownish-pink pink colour, and sends out
irregular prolongations around its margins. The patient may complain of
itching and burning, and of great sensitiveness of the scar, even to
contact with the clothing.

There is a natural hesitation to excise keloid because of the fear of
its returning in the new scar. The application of radium is, so far as
we know, the only means of preventing such return. The irritation
associated with keloid may be relieved by the application of salicylic
collodion or of salicylic and creosote plaster.

_Epithelioma_ is liable to attack scars in old people, especially those
which result from burns sustained early in childhood and have never
really healed. From the absence of lymphatics in scar tissue, the
disease does not spread to the glands until it has invaded the tissues
outside the scar; the prognosis is therefore better than in epithelioma
in general. It should be excised widely; in the lower extremity when
there is also extensive destruction of tissue from an antecedent chronic
ulcer or osteomyelitis, it may be better to amputate the limb.


AFFECTION OF THE NAILS

_Injuries._--When a nail is contused or crushed, blood is extravasated
beneath it, and the nail is usually shed, a new one growing in its
place. A splinter driven underneath the nail causes great pain, and if
organisms are carried in along with it, may give rise to infective
complications. The free edge of the nail should be clipped away to allow
of the removal of the foreign body and the necessary disinfection.

_Trophic Changes._--The growth of the nails may be interfered with in
any disturbance of the general health. In nerve lesions, such as a
divided nerve-trunk, the nails are apt to suffer, becoming curved,
brittle, or furrowed, or they may be shed.

_Onychia_ is the term applied to an infection of the soft parts around
the nail or of the matrix beneath it. The commonest form of onychia has
already been referred to with whitlow. There is a superficial variety
resulting from the extension of a purulent blister beneath the nail
lifting it up from its bed, the pus being visible through the nail. The
nail as well as the raised horny layer of the epidermis should be
removed. A deeper and more troublesome onychia results from infection at
the nail-fold; the infection spreads slowly beneath the fold until it
reaches the matrix, and a drop or two of pus forms beneath the nail,
usually in the region of the lunule. This affection entails a
disability of the finger which may last for weeks unless it is properly
treated. Treatment by hyperaemia, using a suction bell, should first be
tried, and, failing improvement, the nail-fold and lunule should be
frozen, and a considerable portion removed with the knife; if only a
small portion of the nail is removed, the opening is blocked by
granulations springing from the matrix. A new nail is formed, but it is
are purely motor in function. It is attended with definite structural
liable to be misshapen.

_Tuberculous onychia_ is met with in children and adolescents. It
appears as a livid or red swelling at the root of the nail and spreading
around its margins. The epidermis, which is thin and shiny, gives way,
and the nail is usually shed.

[Illustration: FIG. 107.--Subungual Exostosis growing from Distal
Phalanx of Great Toe, showing Ulceration of Skin and Displacement of
Nail.

_a._ Surface view.   _b._ On section.]

_Syphilitic_ affections of the nails assume various aspects. A primary
chancre at the edge of the nail may be mistaken for a whitlow,
especially if it is attended with much pain. Other forms of onychia
occur during secondary syphilis simultaneously with the skin eruptions,
and may prove obstinate and lead to shedding of the nails. They also
occur in inherited syphilis. In addition to general treatment, an
ointment containing 5 per cent. of oleate of mercury should be applied
locally.

_Ingrowing Toe-nail._--This is more accurately described as an
overgrowth of the soft tissues along the edge of the nail. It is most
frequently met with in the great toe in young adults with flat-foot
whose feet perspire freely, who wear ill-fitting shoes, and who cut
their toe-nails carelessly or tear them with their fingers. Where the
soft tissues are pressed against the edge of the nail, the skin gives
way and there is the formation of exuberant granulations and of
discharge which is sometimes foetid. The affection is a painful one and
may unfit the patient for work. In mild cases the condition may be
remedied by getting rid of contributing causes and by disinfecting the
skin and nail; the nail is cut evenly, and the groove between it and the
skin packed with an antiseptic dusting-powder, such as boracic acid. In
more severe cases it may be necessary to remove an ellipse of tissue
consisting of the edge of the nail, together with the subjacent matrix
and the redundant nail-fold.

_Subungual exostosis_ is an osteoma growing from the terminal phalanx of
the great toe (Fig. 107). It raises the nail and may be accompanied by
ulceration of the skin over the most prominent part of the growth. The
soft parts, including the nail, should be reflected towards the dorsum
in the form of a flap, the base of the exostosis divided with the
chisel, and the exostosis removed.

_Malignant disease_ in relation to the nails is rare. Squamous
epithelioma and melanotic cancer are the forms met with. Treatment
consists in amputating the digit concerned, and in removing the
associated lymph glands.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE MUSCLES, TENDONS, AND TENDON SHEATHS


INJURIES: _Contusion_; _Sprain_; _Rupture_--Hernia of
    muscle--Dislocation of tendons--Wounds--Avulsion of tendon.
    DISEASES OF MUSCLE AND OF TENDONS: _Atrophy_; _"Muscular
    rheumatism"_--_Fibrositis_; _Contracture_; _Myositis_;
    _Calcification and Ossification_; _Tumours_. DISEASES OF TENDON
    SHEATHS: _Teno-synovitis_.


INJURIES

#Contusion of Muscle.#--Contusion of muscle, which consists in bruising
of its fibres and blood vessels, may be due to violence acting from
without, as in a blow, a kick, or a fall; or from within, as by the
displacement of bone in a fracture or dislocation.

The symptoms are those common to all contusions, and the patient
complains of severe pain on attempting to use the muscle, and maintains
an attitude which relaxes it. If the sheath of the muscle also is torn,
there is subcutaneous ecchymosis, and the accumulation of blood may
result in the formation of a haematoma.

Restoration of function is usually complete; but when the nerve
supplying the muscle is bruised at the same time, as may occur in the
deltoid, wasting and loss of function may be persistent. In exceptional
cases the process of repair may be attended with the formation of bone
in the substance of the muscle, and this may likewise impair its
function.

A contused muscle should be placed at rest and supported by cotton wool
and a bandage; after an interval, massage and appropriate exercises are

employed.

#Sprain and Partial Rupture of Muscle.#--This lesion consists in
overstretching and partial rupture of the fibres of a muscle or its
aponeurosis. It is of common occurrence in athletes and in those who
follow laborious occupations. It may follow upon a single or repeated
effort--especially in those who are out of training. Familiar examples
of muscular sprain are the "labourer's" or "golfer's back," affecting
the latissimus dorsi or the sacrospinalis (erector spinae); the
"tennis-player's elbow," and the "sculler's sprain," affecting the
muscles and ligaments about the elbow; the "angler's elbow," affecting
the common origin of the extensors and supinators; the "sprinter's
sprain," affecting the flexors of the hip; and the "jumper's and
dancer's sprain," affecting the muscles of the calf. The patient
complains of pain, often sudden in onset, of tenderness on pressure, and
of inability to carry out the particular movement by which the sprain
was produced. The disability varies in different cases, and it may
incapacitate the patient from following his occupation or sport for
weeks or, if imperfectly treated, even for months.

The _treatment_ consists in resting the muscle from the particular
effort concerned in the production of the sprain, in gently exercising
it in other directions, in the use of massage, and the induction of
hyperaemia by means of heat. In neglected cases, that is, where the
muscle has not been exercised, the patient shrinks from using it and the
disablement threatens to be permanent; it is sometimes said that
adhesions have formed and that these interfere with the recovery of
function. The condition may be overcome by graduated movements or by a
sudden forcible movement under an anaesthetic. These cases afford a
fruitful field for the bone-setter.

#Rupture of Muscle or Tendon.#--A muscle or a tendon may be ruptured in
its continuity or torn from its attachment to bone. The site of rupture
in individual muscles is remarkably constant, and is usually at the
junction of the muscular and tendinous portions. When rupture takes
place through the belly of a muscle, the ends retract, the amount of
retraction depending on the length of the muscle, and the extent of its
attachment to adjacent aponeurosis or bone. The biceps in the arm, and
the sartorius in the thigh, furnish examples of muscles in which the
separation between the ends may be considerable.
undergoes rupture is completed. The violent muscular contractions of

The gap in the muscle becomes filled with blood, and this in time is
replaced by connective tissue, which forms a bond of union between the
ends. When the space is considerable the connecting medium consists of
fibrous tissue, but when the ends are in contact it contains a number of
newly formed muscle fibres. In the process of repair, one or both ends
of the muscle or tendon may become fixed by adhesions to adjacent
structures, and if the distal portion of a muscle is deprived of its
nerve supply it may undergo degeneration and so have its function
impaired.

Rupture of a muscle or tendon is usually the result of a sudden, and
often involuntary, movement. As examples may be cited the rupture of
the quadriceps extensor in attempting to regain the balance when falling
backwards; of the gastrocnemius, plantaris, or tendo-calcaneus in
jumping or dancing; of the adductors of the thigh in gripping a horse
when it swerves--"rider's sprain"; of the abdominal muscles in vomiting,
and of the biceps in sudden movements of the arm. Sometimes the effort
is one that would scarcely be thought likely to rupture a muscle, as in
the case recorded by Pagenstecher, where a professional athlete, while
sitting at table, ruptured his biceps in a sudden effort to catch a
falling glass. It would appear that the rupture is brought about not so
much by the contraction of the muscle concerned, as by the contraction
of the antagonistic muscles taking place before that of the muscle which
undergoes rupture is completed. The violent muscular contractions of
epilepsy, tetanus, or delirium rarely cause rupture.

The _clinical features_ are usually characteristic. The patient
experiences a sudden pain, with the sensation of being struck with a
whip, and of something giving way; sometimes a distant snap is heard.
The limb becomes powerless. At the seat of rupture there is tenderness
and swelling, and there may be ecchymosis. As the swelling subsides, a
gap may be felt between the retracted ends, and this becomes wider when
the muscle is thrown into contraction. If untreated, a hard, fibrous
cord remains at the seat of rupture.

_Treatment._--The ends are approximated by placing the limb in an
attitude which relaxes the muscle, and the position is maintained by
bandages, splints, or special apparatus. When it is impossible thus to
approximate the ends satisfactorily, the muscle or tendon is exposed by
incision, and the ends brought into accurate contact by catgut sutures.
This operation of primary suture yields the most satisfactory results,
and is most successful when it is done within five or six days of the
accident. Secondary suture after an interval of months is rendered
difficult by the retraction of the ends and by their adhesion to
adjacent structures.

_Rupture of the biceps of the arm_ may involve the long or the short
head, or the belly of the muscle. Most interest attaches to rupture of
the long tendon of origin. There is pain and tenderness in front of the
upper end of the humerus, the patient is unable to abduct or to elevate
the arm, and he may be unable to flex the elbow when the forearm is
supinated. The long axis of the muscle, instead of being parallel with
the humerus, inclines downwards and outwards. When the patient is asked
to contract the muscle, its belly is seen to be drawn towards the
elbow.

The _adductor longus_ may be ruptured, or torn from the pubes, by a
violent effort to adduct the limb. A swelling forms in the upper and
medial part of the thigh, which becomes smaller and harder when the
muscle is thrown into contraction.

The _quadriceps femoris_ is usually ruptured close to its insertion into
the patella, in the attempt to avoid falling backwards. The injury is
sometimes bilateral. The injured limb is rendered useless for
progression, as it suddenly gives way whenever the knee is flexed.
Treatment is conducted on the same lines as in transverse fracture of
the patella; in the majority of cases the continuity of the quadriceps
should be re-established by suture within five or six days of the
accident.

The _tendo calcaneus_ (Achillis) is comparatively easily ruptured, and
the symptoms are sometimes so slight that the nature of the injury may
be overlooked. The limb should be put up with the knee flexed and the
leech-bites, acne pustules, boils or blisters; those resulting from
toes pointed. This may be effected by attaching one end of an elastic
band to the heel of a slipper, and securing the other to the lower third
of the thigh. If this is not sufficient to bring the ends into
apposition they should be approximated by an open operation.

The _plantaris_ is not infrequently ruptured from trivial causes, such
as a sudden movement in boxing, tennis, or hockey. A sharp stinging pain
like the stroke of a whip is felt in the calf; there is marked
tenderness at the seat of rupture, and the patient is unable to raise
the heel without pain. The injury is of little importance, and if the
patient does not raise the heel from the ground in walking, it is
recovered from in a couple of weeks or so, without it being necessary to
lay him up.

#Hernia of Muscle.#--This is a rare condition, in which, owing to the
fascia covering a muscle becoming stretched or torn, the muscular
substance is protruded through the rent. It has been observed chiefly in
the adductor longus. An oval swelling forms in the upper part of the
thigh, is soft and prominent when the muscle is relaxed, less prominent
when it is passively extended, and disappears when the muscle is thrown
into contraction. It is liable to be mistaken, according to its
situation, for a tumour, a cyst, a pouched vein, or a femoral or
obturator hernia. Treatment is only called for when it is causing
inconvenience, the muscle being exposed by a suitable incision, the
herniated portion excised, and the rent in the sheath closed by sutures.

#Dislocation of Tendons.#--Tendons which run in grooves may be displaced
as a result of rupture of the confining sheath. This injury is met with
chiefly in the tendons at the ankle and in the long tendon of the
biceps.

Dislocation of the _peronei tendons_ may occur, for example, from a
violent twist of the foot. There is severe pain and considerable
swelling on the lateral aspect of the ankle; the peroneus longus by
itself, or together with the brevis, can be felt on the lateral aspect
or in front of the lateral malleolus; the patient is unable to move the
foot. By a little manipulation the tendons are replaced in their
grooves, and are retained there by a series of strips of plaster. At the
end of three weeks massage and exercises are employed.

In other cases there is no history of injury, but whenever the foot is
everted the tendon of the peroneus longus is liable to be jerked
forwards out of its groove, sometimes with an audible snap. The patient
suffers pain and is disabled until the tendon is replaced. Reduction is
easy, but as the displacement tends to recur, an operation is required
to fix the tendon in its place. An incision is made over the tendon; if
the sheath is slack or torn, it is tightened up or closed with catgut
sutures; or an artificial sheath is made by raising up a quadrilateral
flap of periosteum from the lateral aspect of the fibula, and stitching
it over the tendon.

Similarly the _tibialis posterior_ may be displaced over the medial
malleolus as a result of inversion of the foot.

The _long tendon of the biceps_ may be dislocated laterally--or more
frequently medially--as a result of violent or repeated rotation
movements of the arm, such as are performed in wringing clothes. The
patient is aware of the displacement taking place, and is unable to
extend the forearm until the displaced tendon has been reduced by
abducting the arm. In recurrent cases the patient may be able to
dislocate the tendon at will, but the disability is so inconsiderable
that there is rarely any occasion for interference.

#Wounds of Muscles and Tendons.#--When a muscle is cut across in a
wound, its ends should be brought together with sutures. If the ends are
allowed to retract, and especially if the wound suppurates, they become
united by scar tissue and fixed to bone or other adjacent structure. In
a limb this interferes with the functions of the muscle; in the
abdominal wall the scar tissue may stretch, and so favour the
development of a ventral hernia.

Tendons may be cut across accidentally, especially in those wounds so
commonly met with above the wrist as a result, for example, of the hand
being thrust through a pane of glass. It is essential that the ends
should be sutured to each other, and as the proximal end is retracted
the original wound may require to be enlarged in an upward direction.
When primary suture has been omitted, or has failed in consequence of
suppuration, the separated ends of the tendon become adherent to
adjacent structures, and the function of the associated muscle is
impaired or lost. Under these conditions the operation of secondary
suture is indicated.

A free incision is necessary to discover and isolate the ends of the
tendon; if the interval is too wide to admit of their being approximated
by sutures, means must be taken to lengthen the tendon, or one from some
other part may be inserted in the gap. A new sheath may be provided for
the tendon by resecting a portion of the great saphenous vein.

_Injuries of the tendons of the fingers_ are comparatively common. One
of the best known is the partial or complete rupture of the aponeurosis
of the extensor tendon close to its insertion into the terminal
phalanx--_drop-_ or _mallet-finger_. This may result from comparatively
slight violence, such as striking the tip of the extended finger against
an object, or the violence may be more severe, as in attempting to catch
a cricket ball or in falling. The terminal phalanx is flexed towards the
palm and the patient is unable to extend it. The treatment consists in
putting up the finger with the middle joint strongly flexed. In
neglected cases, a perfect functional result can only be obtained by
operation; under a local anaesthetic, the ruptured tendon is exposed and
is sutured to the base of the phalanx, which may be drilled for the
passage of the sutures.

_Subcutaneous rupture_ of one or other _of the digital tendons_ in the
hand or at the wrist can be remedied only by operation. When some time
has elapsed since the accident, the proximal end may be so retracted
that it cannot be brought down into contact with the distal end, in
which case a slip may be taken from an adjacent tendon; in the case of
one of the extensors of the thumb, the extensor carpi radialis longus
may be detached from its insertion and stitched to the distal end of the
tendon of the thumb.

Subcutaneous _rupture of the tendon of the extensor pollicis longus_ at
the wrist takes place just after its emergence from beneath the annular
ligament; the actual rupture may occur painlessly, more frequently a
sharp pain is felt over the back of the wrist. The prominence of the
tendon, which normally forms the ulnar border of the snuff-box,
disappears. This lesion is chiefly met with in drummer-boys and is the
cause of drummer's palsy. The only chance of restoring function is in
uniting the ruptured tendon by open operation.

[Illustration: FIG. 108.--Avulsion of Tendon with Terminal Phalanx of
Thumb.

(Surgical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]

_Avulsion of Tendons._--This is a rare injury, in which the tendons of a
finger or toe are torn from their attachments along with a portion of
the digit concerned. In the hand, it is usually brought about by the
of any gouty tendencies that may be present. Remedies such as
fingers being caught in the reins of a runaway horse, or being seized in
a horse's teeth, or in machinery. It is usually the terminal phalanx
that is separated, and with it the tendon of the deep flexor, which
ruptures at its junction with the belly of the muscle (Fig. 108). The
treatment consists in disinfecting the wound, closing the tendon-sheath,
and trimming the mutilated finger so as to provide a useful stump.


DISEASES OF MUSCLES AND TENDONS

_Congenital absence_ of muscles is sometimes met with, usually in
association with other deformities. The pectoralis major, for example,
may be absent on one or on both sides, without, however, causing any
disability, as other muscles enlarge and take on its functions.

_Atrophy of Muscle._--Simple atrophy, in which the muscle elements are
merely diminished in size without undergoing any structural alteration,
is commonly met with as a result of disuse, as when a patient is
confined to bed for a long period.

In cases of joint disease, the muscles acting on the joint become
atrophied more rapidly than is accounted for by disuse alone, and this
is attributed to an interference with the trophic innervation of the
muscles reflected from centres in the spinal medulla. It is more marked
in the extensor than in the flexor groups of muscles. Those affected
become soft and flaccid, exhibit tremors on attempted movement, and
their excitability to the faradic current is diminished.

_Neuropathic atrophy_ is associated with lesions of the nervous system.
It is most pronounced in lesions of the motor nerve-trunks, probably
because vaso-motor and trophic fibres are involved as well as those that
are purely motor in function. It is attended with definite structural
alterations, the muscle elements first undergoing fatty degeneration,
and then being absorbed, and replaced to a large extent by ordinary
connective tissue and fat. At a certain stage the muscles exhibit the
reaction of degeneration. In the common form of paralysis resulting from
poliomyelitis, many fibres undergo fatty degeneration and are replaced
by fat, while at the same time there is a regeneration of muscle fibres.

#Fibrositis# or "#Muscular Rheumatism#."--This clinical term is applied
to a group of affections of which lumbago is the best-known example. The
group includes lumbago, stiff-neck, and pleurodynia--conditions which
have this in common, that sudden and severe pain is excited by movement
of the affected part. The lesion consists in inflammatory hyperplasia of
the connective tissue; the new tissue differs from normal fibrous tissue
in its tendency to contract, in being swollen, painful and tender on
pressure, and in the fact that it can be massaged away (Stockman). It
would appear to involve mainly the fibrous tissue of muscles, although
it may extend from this to aponeuroses, ligaments, periosteum, and the
sheaths of nerves. The term _fibrositis_ was applied to it by Gowers in
1904.

In _lumbago_--_lumbo-sacral fibrositis_--the pain is usually located
over the sacrum, the sacro-iliac joint, or the aponeurosis of the lumbar
muscles on one or both sides. The amount of tenderness varies, and so
long as the patient is still he is free from pain. The slightest
attempt to alter his position, however, is attended by pain, which may
be so severe as to render him helpless for the moment. The pain is most
marked on rising from the stooping or sitting posture, and may extend
down the back of the hip, especially if, as is commonly the case,
lumbago and gluteal fibrosis coexist. Once a patient has suffered from
lumbago, it is liable to recur, and an attack may be determined by
errors of diet, changes of weather, exposure to cold or unwonted
exertion. It is met with chiefly in male adults, and is most apt to
occur in those who are gouty or are the subjects of oxaluric dyspepsia.

_Gluteal fibrositis_ usually follows exposure to wet, and affects the
gluteal muscles, particularly the medius, and their aponeurotic
coverings. When the condition has lasted for some time, indurated
strands or nodules can be detected on palpating the relaxed muscles. The
patient complains of persistent aching and stiffness over the buttock,
and sometimes extending down the lateral aspect of the thigh. The pain
is aggravated by such movements as bring the affected muscles into
action. It is not referred to the line of the sciatic nerve, nor is
there tenderness on pressing over the nerve, or sensations of tingling
or numbness in the leg or foot.

If untreated, the morbid process may implicate the sheath of the sciatic
nerve and cause genuine sciatic neuralgia (Llewellyn and Jones). A
similar condition may implicate the fascia lata of the thigh, or the
calf muscles and their aponeuroses--_crural fibrositis_.

In _painful stiff-neck_, or "rheumatic torticollis," the pain is located
in one side of the neck, and is excited by some inadvertent movement.
The head is held stiffly on one side as in wry-neck, the patient
contracting the sterno-mastoid. There may be tenderness over the
vertebral spines or in the lines of the cervical nerves, and the
sterno-mastoid may undergo atrophy. This affection is more often met
with in children.
tendon sheaths through the blood-stream, as in the gouty, gonorrhoeal,

In _pleurodynia_--_intercostal fibrositis_--the pain is in the line of
the intercostal nerves, and is excited by movement of the chest, as in
coughing, or by any bodily exertion. There is often marked tenderness.

A similar affection is met with in the _shoulder and arm_--_brachial
fibrositis_--especially on waking from sleep. There is acute pain on
attempting to abduct the arm, and there may be localised tenderness in
the region of the axillary nerve.

_Treatment._--The general treatment is concerned with the diet,
attention to the stomach, bowels, and kidneys and with the correction
of any gouty tendencies that may be present. Remedies such as
salicylates are given for the relief of pain, and for this purpose drugs
of the aspirin type are to be preferred, and these may be followed by
large doses of iodide of potassium. Great benefit is derived from
massage, and from the induction of hyperaemia by means of heat. Cupping
or needling, or, in exceptional cases, hypodermic injections of
antipyrin or morphin, may be called for. To prevent relapses of lumbago,
the patient must take systematic exercises of all kinds, especially such
as bring out the movements of the vertebral column and hip-joints.

[Illustration: FIG. 109.--Volkmann's Ischaemic Contracture. When the
extension, and restriction of pronation.
wrist is flexed to a right angle it is possible to extend the fingers.

(Photographs lent by Mr. Lawford Knaggs)]

#Contracture of Muscles.#--Permanent shortening of muscles results from
the prolonged approximation of their points of attachment, or from
structural changes in their substance produced by injury or by disease.
It is a frequent accompaniment and sometimes a cause of deformities, in
the treatment of which lengthening of the shortened muscles or their
tendons may be an essential step.

#Myositis.#--_Ischaemic Myositis._--Volkmann was the first to describe a
form of myositis followed by contracture, resulting from interference
with the arterial blood supply. It is most frequently observed in the
flexor muscles of the forearm in children and young persons under
treatment for fractures in the region of the elbow, the splints and
bandages causing compression of the blood vessels. There is considerable
effusion of blood, the skin is tense, and the muscles, vessels, and
nerves are compressed; this is further increased if the elbow is flexed
and splints and tight bandages are applied. The muscles acquire a
board-like hardness and no longer contract under the will, and passive
motion is painful and restricted. Slight contracture of the fingers is
usually the first sign of the malady; in time the muscles undergo
further contraction, and this brings about a claw-like deformity of the
hand. The affected muscles usually show the reaction of degeneration. In
severe cases the median and ulnar nerves are also the seat of
cicatricial changes (ischaemic neuritis).

By means of splints, the interphalangeal, metacarpo-phalangeal, and
wrist joints should be gradually extended until the deformity is
over-corrected (R. Jones). Murphy advises resection of the radius and
ulna sufficient to admit of dorsiflexion of the joints and lengthening
of the flexor tendons.

Various forms of _pyogenic_ infection are met with in muscle, most
frequently in relation to pyaemia and to typhoid fever. These may result
in overgrowth of the connective-tissue framework of the muscle and
degeneration of its fibres, or in suppuration and the formation of one
or more abscesses in the muscle substance. Repair may be associated with
contracture.

A _gonorrhoeal_ form of myositis is sometimes met with; it is painful,
but rarely goes on to suppuration.

In the early secondary period of _syphilis_, the muscles may be the seat
of dull, aching, nocturnal pains, especially in the neck and back.
_Syphilitic contracture_ is a condition which has been observed chiefly
in the later secondary period; the biceps of the arm and the hamstrings
in the thigh are the muscles more commonly affected. The striking
feature is a gradually increasing difficulty of extending the limb at
the elbow or knee, and progressive flexion of the joint. The affected
muscle is larger and firmer than normal, and its electric excitability
is diminished. In tertiary syphilis, individual muscles may become the
seat of interstitial myositis or of gummata, and these affections
readily yield to anti-syphilitic remedies.

_Tuberculous disease_ in muscle, while usually due to extension from
adjacent tissues, is sometimes the result of a primary infection through
the blood-stream. Tuberculous nodules are found disseminated throughout
the muscle; the surrounding tissues are indurated, and central caseation
may take place and lead to abscess formation and sinuses. We have
observed this form of tuberculous disease in the gastrocnemius and in
the psoas--in the latter muscle apart from tuberculous disease in the
vertebrae.

#Tendinitis.#--German authors describe an inflammation of tendon as
distinguished from inflammation of its sheath, and give it the name
tendinitis. It is met with most frequently in the tendo-calcaneus in
gouty and rheumatic subjects who have overstrained the tendon,
especially during cold and damp weather. There is localised pain which
is aggravated by walking, and the tendon is sensitive and swollen from a
little above its insertion to its junction with the muscle. Gouty
nodules may form in its substance. Constitutional measures, massage, and
douching should be employed, and the tendon should be protected from
strain.

#Calcification and Ossification in Muscles, Tendons, and
Fasciae.#--_Myositis ossificans._--Ossifications in muscles, tendons,
fasciae, and ligaments, in those who are the subjects of arthritis
deformans, are seldom recognised clinically, but are frequently met with
in dissecting-rooms and museums. Similar localised ossifications are met
with in Charcot's disease of joints, and in fractures which have
repaired with exuberant callus. The new bone may be in the form of
spicules, plates, or irregular masses, which, when connected with a
bone, are called _false exostoses_ (Fig. 110).

[Illustration: FIG. 110.--Ossification in Tendon of Ilio-psoas Muscle.]

_Traumatic Ossification in Relation to Muscle._--Various forms of
ossification are met with in muscle as the result of a single or of
repeated injury. Ossification in the crureus or vastus lateralis muscle
has been frequently observed as a result of a kick from a horse. Within
a week or two a swelling appears at the site of injury, and becomes
progressively harder until its consistence is that of bone. If the mass
of new bone moves with the affected muscle, it causes little
inconvenience. If, as is commonly the case, it is fixed to the femur,
the action of the muscle is impaired, and the patient complains of pain
and difficulty in flexing the knee. A skiagram shows the extent of the
mass and its relationship to the femur. The treatment consists in
excising the bony mass.

Difficulty may arise in differentiating such a mass of bone from
sarcoma; the ossification in muscle is uniformly hard, while the sarcoma
varies in consistence at different parts, and the X-ray picture shows a
clear outline of the bone in the vicinity of the ossification in
muscle, whereas in sarcoma the involvement of the bone is shown by
indentations and irregularity in its contour.

A similar ossification has been observed in relation to the insertion of
the brachialis muscle as a sequel of dislocation of the elbow. After
reduction of the dislocation, the range of movement gradually diminishes
and a hard swelling appears in front of the lower end of the humerus.
The lump continues to increase in size and in three to four weeks the
disability becomes complete. A radiogram shows a shadow in the muscle,
attached at one part as a rule to the coronoid process. During the next
three or four months, the lump in front of the elbow remains stationary
in size; a gradual decrease then ensues, but the swelling persists, as a
rule, for several years.

[Illustration: FIG. 111.--Calcification and Ossification in Biceps and
Triceps.

(From a radiogram lent by Dr. C. A. Adair Dighton.)]

Ossification in the adductor longus was first described by Billroth
under the name of "rider's bone." It follows bruising and partial
rupture of the muscle, and has been observed chiefly in cavalry
soldiers. If it causes inconvenience the bone may be removed by
operation.

Ossification in the deltoid and pectoral muscles has been observed in
foot-soldiers in the German army, and has received the name of
"drill-bone"; it is due to bruising of the muscle by the recoil of the
rifle.

_Progressive Ossifying Myositis._--This is a rare and interesting
disease, in which the muscles, tendons, and fasciae throughout the body
become the seat of ossification. It affects almost exclusively the male
sex, and usually begins in childhood or youth, sometimes after an
injury, sometimes without apparent cause. The muscles of the back,
especially the trapezius and latissimus, are the first to be affected,
and the initial complaint is limitation of movement.

[Illustration: FIG. 112.--Ossification in Muscles of Trunk in a case of
generalised Ossifying Myositis.

(Photograph lent by Dr. Rustomjee.)]

The affected muscles show swellings which are rounded or oval, firm and
elastic, sharply defined, without tenderness and without discoloration
of the overlying skin. Skiagrams show that a considerable deposit of
lime salts may precede the formation of bone, as is seen in Fig. 111. In
course of time the vertebral column becomes rigid, the head is bent
forward, the hips are flexed, and abduction and other movements of the
arms are limited. The disease progresses by fits and starts, until all
the striped muscles of the body are replaced by bone, and all movements,
even those of the jaws, are abolished. The subjects of this disease
usually succumb to pulmonary tuberculosis.

There is no means of arresting the disease, and surgical treatment is
restricted to the removal or division of any mass of bone that
interferes with an important movement.

A remarkable feature of this disease is the frequent presence of a
deformity of the great toe, which usually takes the form of hallux
valgus, the great toe coming to lie beneath the second one; the
shortening is usually ascribed to absence of the first phalanx, but it
has been shown to depend also on a synostosis and imperfect development
of the phalanges. A similar deformity of the thumb is sometimes met
with.

Microscopical examination of the muscles shows that, prior to the
deposition of lime salts and the formation of bone, there occurs a
proliferation of the intra-muscular connective tissue and a gradual
replacement and absorption of the muscle fibres. The bone is spongy in
character, and its development takes place along similar lines to those
observed in ossification from the periosteum.

#Tumours of Muscle.#--With the exception of congenital varieties, such
as the rhabdomyoma, tumours of muscle grow from the connective-tissue
framework and not from the muscle fibres. Innocent tumours, such as the
fibroma, lipoma, angioma, and neuro-fibroma, are rare. Malignant tumours
may be primary in the muscle, or may result from extension from adjacent
growths--for example, implication of the pectoral muscle in cancer of
the breast--or they may be derived from tumours situated elsewhere. The
diagnosis of an intra-muscular tumour is made by observing that the
swelling is situated beneath the deep fascia, that it becomes firm and
fixed when the muscle contracts, and that, when the muscle is relaxed,
it becomes softer, and can be moved in the transverse axis of the
muscle, but not in its long axis.

Clinical interest attaches to that form of slowly growing
fibro-sarcoma--_the recurrent fibroid of Paget_--which is most
frequently met with in the muscles of the abdominal wall. A rarer
variety is the ossifying chondro-sarcoma, which undergoes ossification
to such an extent as to be visible in skiagrams.

In primary sarcoma the treatment consists in removing the muscle. In the
limbs, the function of the muscle that is removed may be retained by
transplanting an adjacent muscle in its place.

_Hydatid cysts_ of muscle resemble those developing in other tissues.


DISEASES OF TENDON SHEATHS

Tendon sheaths have the same structure and function as the synovial
membranes of joints, and are liable to the same diseases. Apart from the
tendon sheaths displayed in anatomical dissections, there is a loose
peritendinous and perimuscular cellular tissue which is subject to the
same pathological conditions as the tendon sheaths proper.

#Teno-synovitis.#--The toxic or infective agent is conveyed to the
tendon sheaths through the blood-stream, as in the gouty, gonorrhoeal,
and tuberculous varieties, or is introduced directly through a wound, as
in the common pyogenic form of teno-synovitis.

_Teno-synovitis Crepitans._--In the simple or traumatic form of
teno-synovitis, although the most prominent etiological factor is a
strain or over-use of the tendon, there would appear to be some other,
probably a toxic, factor in its production, otherwise the affection
would be much more common than it is: only a small proportion of those
who strain or over-use their tendons become the subjects of
teno-synovitis. The opposed surfaces of the tendon and its sheath are
covered with fibrinous lymph, so that there is friction when they move
on one another.

The _clinical features_ are pain on movement, tenderness on pressure
over the affected tendon, and a sensation of crepitation or friction
when the tendon is moved in its sheath. The crepitation may be soft like
the friction of snow, or may resemble the creaking of new
leather--"saddle-back creaking." There may be swelling in the long axis
of the tendon, and redness and oedema of the skin. If there is an
effusion of fluid into the sheath, the swelling is more marked and
crepitation is absent. There is little tendency to the formation of
adhesions.

In the upper extremity, the sheath of the long tendon of the biceps may
be affected, but the condition is most common in the tendons about the
wrist, particularly in the extensors of the thumb, and it is most
frequently met with in those who follow occupations which involve
prolonged use or excessive straining of these tendons--for example,
washerwomen or riveters. It also occurs as a result of excessive
piano-playing, fencing, or rowing.

At the ankle it affects the peronei, the extensor digitorum longus, or
the tibialis anterior. It is most often met with in relation to the
tendo-calcaneus--_Achillo-dynia_--and results from the pressure of
ill-fitting boots or from the excessive use and strain of the tendon in
cycling, walking, or dancing. There is pain in raising the heel from the
ground, and creaking can be felt on palpation.

The _treatment_ consists in putting the affected tendon at rest, and
with this object a splint may be helpful; the usual remedies for
inflammation are indicated: Bier's hyperaemia, lead and opium
fomentations, and ichthyol and glycerine. The affection readily subsides
under treatment, but is liable to relapse on a repetition of the
exciting cause.

_Gouty Teno-synovitis._--A deposit of urate of soda beneath the
endothelial covering of tendons or of that lining their sheaths is
commonly met with in gouty subjects. The accumulation of urates may
result in the formation of visible nodular swellings, varying in size
from a pea to a cherry, attached to the tendon and moving with it. They
may be merely unsightly, or they may interfere with the use of the
tendon. Recurrent attacks of inflammation are prone to occur. We have
removed such gouty masses with satisfactory results.

_Suppurative Teno-synovitis._--This form usually follows upon infected
wounds of the fingers--especially of the thumb or little finger--and is
a frequent sequel to whitlow; it may also follow amputation of a finger.
Once the infection has gained access to the sheath, it tends to spread,
and may reach the palm or even the forearm, being then associated with
cellulitis. In moderately acute cases the tendon and its sheath become
covered with granulations, which subsequently lead to the formation of
adhesions; while in more acute cases the tendon sloughs. The pus may
burst into the cellular tissue outside the sheath, and the suppuration
is liable to spread to neighbouring sheaths or to adjacent bones or
joints--for example, those of the wrist.

The _treatment_ consists in inducing hyperaemia and making small
incisions for the escape of pus. The site of incision is determined by
the point of greatest tenderness on pressure. After the inflammation has
subsided, active and passive movements are employed to prevent the
formation of adhesions between the tendon and its sheath. If the tendon
sloughs, the dead portion should be cut away, as its separation is
extremely slow and is attended with prolonged suppuration.

_Gonorrhoeal Teno-synovitis._--This is met with especially in the tendon
sheaths about the wrist and ankle. It may occur in a mild form, with
pain, impairment of movement, and oedema, and sometimes an elongated,
fluctuating swelling, the result of serous effusion into the sheath.
This condition may alternate with a gonorrhoeal affection of one of the
larger joints. It may subside under rest and soothing applications, but
is liable to relapse. In the more severe variety the skin is red, and
the swelling partakes of the characters of a phlegmon with threatening
suppuration; it may result in crippling from adhesions. Even if pus
forms in the sheath, the tendon rarely sloughs. The treatment consists
in inducing hyperaemia by Bier's method; and a vaccine may be employed
with satisfactory results.

#Tuberculous Disease of Tendon Sheaths.#--This is a comparatively common
affection, and is analogous to tuberculous disease of the synovial
membrane of joints. It may originate in the sheath, or may spread to it
from an adjacent bone.

The commonest form--hydrops--is that in which the synovial sheath is
distended with a viscous fluid, and the fibrinous material on the free
surface becomes detached and is moulded into melon-seed bodies by the
movement of the tendon. The sheath itself is thickened by the growth of
tuberculous granulation tissue. The bodies are smooth and of a
dull-white colour, and vary greatly in size and shape. There may be an
overgrowth of the fatty fringes of the synovial sheath, a condition
described as "arborescent lipoma."

The _clinical features_ vary with the tendon sheath affected. In the
common flexor sheath of the hand an hour-glass-shaped swelling is
formed, bulging above and below the transverse carpal (anterior annular)
ligament--formerly known as _compound palmar ganglion_. There is little
or no pain, but the fingers tend to be stiff and weak, and to become
flexed. On palpation, it is usually possible to displace the contents of
the sheath from one compartment to the other, and this may yield
fluctuation, and, what is more characteristic, a peculiar soft crepitant
sensation from the movement of the melon-seed bodies. In the sheath of
the peronei or other tendons about the ankle, the swelling is
sausage-shaped, and is constricted opposite the annular ligament.

The onset and progress of the affection are most insidious, and the
condition may remain stationary for long periods. It is aggravated by
use or strain of the tendons involved. In exceptional cases the skin is
thinned and gives way, resulting in the formation of a sinus.

_Treatment._--In the common flexor sheath of the palm, an attempt may be
made to cure the condition by removing the contents through a small
incision and filling the cavity with iodoform glycerine, followed by the
use of Bier's bandage. If this fails, the distended sheath is laid open,
the contents removed, the wall scraped, and the wound closed.

A less common form of tuberculous disease is that in which the sheath
becomes the seat of _a diffuse tuberculous thickening_, not unlike the
white swelling met with in joints, and with a similar tendency to
caseation. A painless swelling of an elastic character forms in relation
to the tendon sheath. It is hour-glass-shaped in the common flexor
sheath of the palm, elongated or sausage-shaped in the extensors of the
wrist and in the tendons at the ankle. The tuberculous granulation
tissue is liable to break down and lead to the formation of a cold
abscess and sinuses, and in our experience is often associated with
disease in an adjacent bone or joint. In the peronei tendons, for
example, it may result from disease of the fibula or of the ankle-joint.

When conservative measures fail, excision of the affected sheath should
be performed; the whole of the diseased area being exposed by free
incision of the overlying soft parts, the sheath is carefully isolated
from the surrounding tissues and is cut across above and below. Any
tuberculous tissue on the tendon itself is removed with a sharp spoon.
Associated bone or joint lesions are dealt with at the same time. In the
after-treatment the functions of the tendons must be preserved by
voluntary and passive movements.

#Syphilitic Affections of Tendon Sheaths.#--These closely resemble the
syphilitic affections of the synovial membrane of joints. During the
secondary period the lesion usually consists in effusion into the
sheath; gummata are met with during the tertiary period.

Arborescent lipoma has been found in the sheaths of tendons about the
wrist and ankle, sometimes in a multiple and symmetrical form,
unattended by symptoms and disappearing under anti-syphilitic treatment.

#Tumours of Tendon Sheaths.#--Innocent tumours, such as _lipoma_,
_fibroma_, and _myxoma_, are rare. Special mention should be made of the
_myeloma_ which is met with at the wrist or ankle as an elongated
swelling of slow development, or over the phalanx of a finger as a small
rounded swelling. The tumour tissue, when exposed by dissection, is of a
chocolate or chamois-yellow colour, and consists almost entirely of
giant cells. The treatment consists in dissecting the tumour tissue off
the tendons, and this is usually successful in bringing about a
permanent cure.

All varieties of _sarcoma_ are met with, but their origin from tendon
sheaths is not associated with special features.




CHAPTER XIX

THE BURSAE


Anatomy--Normal and adventitious bursae--Injuries: Bursal
    haematoma--DISEASES: Infective bursitis; Traumatic or trade
    bursitis; Bursal hydrops; Solid bursal tumour; Gonorrhoeal and
    suppurative forms of bursitis; Tuberculous and syphilitic
    disease--Tumours--_Diseases of individual bursae in the upper and
    lower extremities_.

A bursa is a closed sac lined by endothelium and containing synovia.
Some are normally present--for instance, that between the skin and the
patella, and that between the aponeurosis of the gluteus maximus and the
great trochanter. _Adventitious bursae_ are developed as a result of
abnormal pressure--for example, over the tarsal bones in cases of
club-foot.

#Injuries of Bursae.#--As a result of contusion, especially in bleeders,
haemorrhage may occur into the cavity of a bursa and give rise to a
_bursal haematoma_. Such a haematoma may mask a fracture of the bone
beneath--for example, fracture of the olecranon.

#Diseases of Bursae.#--The lining membrane of bursae resembles that of
joints and tendon sheaths, and is liable to the same forms of disease.

#Infective bursitis# frequently follows abrasions, scratches, and wounds
of the skin over the prepatellar or olecranon bursa, and in neglected
cases the infection transgresses the wall of the bursa and gives rise to
a spreading cellulitis.

#Traumatic or Trade Bursitis.#--This term may be conveniently applied to
those affections of bursae which result from repeated slight traumatism
incident to particular occupations. The most familiar examples of these
are the enlargement of the prepatellar bursa met with in housemaids--the
"housemaid's knee" (Fig. 113); the enlargement of the olecranon
bursa--"miner's elbow"; and of the ischial bursa--"weaver's" or
"tailor's bottom" (Fig. 116). These affections are characterised by an
effusion of fluid into the sac of the bursa with thickening of its
lining membrane. While friction and pressure are the most evident
factors in their production, it is probable that there is also some
toxic agent concerned, otherwise these affections would be much more
common than they are. Of the countless housemaids in whom the
prepatellar bursa is subjected to friction and pressure, only a small
proportion become the subjects of housemaid's knee.

_Clinical Features._--As these are best illustrated in the different
varieties of prepatellar bursitis, it is convenient to take this as the
type. In a number of cases the inflammation is acute and the patient is
unable to use the limb; the part is hot, swollen, and tender, and
fluctuation can be detected in the bursa. In the majority the condition
is chronic, and the chief feature is the gradual accumulation of fluid
constituting the _bursal hydrops_ or _hygroma_. When the affection has
lasted some time, or has frequently relapsed, the wall of the bursa
becomes thickened by fibrous tissue, which may be deposited irregularly,
so that septa, bands, or fringes are formed, not unlike those met with
in arthritis deformans. These fringes may be detached and form loose
bodies like those met with in joints; less frequently there are
fibrinous bodies of the melon-seed type, sometimes moulded into circular
discs like wafers. The presence of irregular thickenings of the wall, or
of loose bodies, may be recognised on palpation, especially in
superficial bursae, if the sac is not tensely filled with fluid. The
thickening of the wall may take place in a uniform and concentric
fashion, resulting in the formation of a fibrous tumour--_the solid
bursal tumour_--a small cavity remaining in the centre which serves to
distinguish it from a new growth or neoplasm.

[Illustration: FIG. 113.--Hydrops of Prepatellar Bursa in a housemaid.]

The _treatment_ varies according to the variety and stage of the
affection. In recent cases the symptoms subside under rest and the
application of fomentations. Hydrops may be got rid of by blistering,
by tapping, or by incision and drainage. When the wall is thickened, the
most satisfactory treatment is to excise the bursa; the overlying skin
being reflected in the shape of a horse-shoe flap or being removed along
with the bursa.

#Other Diseases of Bursae# are associated with _gonorrhoeal infection_,
and with _rheumatism_, especially that following scarlet fever, and are
apt to be persistent or to relapse after apparent cure. In the _gouty_
form, urate of soda is deposited in the wall of the bursa, and may
result in the formation of chalky tumours, sometimes of considerable
size (Fig. 114).

[Illustration: FIG. 114.--Section through Bursa over external malleolus,
showing deposit of urate of soda. (Cf. Fig. 117.)]

_Tuberculous disease_ of bursae closely resembles that of tendon sheaths.
It may occur as an independent affection, or may be associated with
disease in an adjacent bone or joint. It is met with chiefly in the
prepatellar and subdeltoid bursae, or in one of the bursae over the great
trochanter. The clinical features are those of an indolent hydrops, with
or without melon-seed bodies, or of uniform thickening of the wall of
the bursa; the tuberculous granulation tissue may break down into a cold
abscess, and give rise to sinuses. The best treatment is to excise the
affected bursa, or, when this is impracticable, to lay it freely open,
remove the tuberculous tissue with the sharp spoon or knife, and treat
the cavity by the open method.

_Syphilitic disease_ is rarely recognised except in the form of bursal
and peri-bursal gummata in front of the knee-joint.

_New growths_ include the fibroma, the myxoma, the myeloma or
giant-celled tumour, and various forms of sarcoma.
especially if it is attended with much pain. Other forms of onychia

#Diseases of Individual Bursae.#--The _olecranon bursa_ is frequently
the seat of pyogenic infection and of traumatic or trade bursitis, the
latter being known as "miner's" or "student's elbow."

[Illustration: FIG. 115.--Tuberculous Disease of Sub-deltoid Bursa.

(From a photograph lent by Sir George T. Beatson.)]

The _sub-deltoid_ or _sub-acromial bursa_, which usually presents a
single cavity and does not normally communicate with the shoulder-joint,
is indispensable in abduction and rotation of the humerus. When the arm
is abducted, the fixed lower part or floor of the bursa is carried under
the acromion, and the upper part or roof is rolled up in the same
direction, hence tenderness over the inflamed bursa may disappear when
the arm is abducted (Dawbarn's sign). It is liable to traumatic
affections from a fall on the shoulder, pressure, or over-use of the
limb. Pain, located commonly at the insertion of the deltoid, is a
constant symptom and is especially annoying at night, the patient being
unable to get into a comfortable position. Tenderness may be elicited
over the anatomical limits of the bursa, and is usually most marked over
the great tuberosity, just external to the inter-tubercular (bicipital)
groove. When adhesions are present, abduction beyond 10 degrees is
impossible. Demonstrable effusion is not uncommon, but is disguised by
the overlying tissues. If left to himself, the patient tends to maintain
the limb in the "sling position," and resists movements in the direction
of abduction and rotation. In the treatment of this affection the arm
should be maintained at a right angle to the body, the arm being rotated
medially (Codman). When pain does not prevent it, movements of the arm
and massage are persevered with. In neglected cases, when adhesions have
formed and the shoulder is fixed, it may be necessary to break down the
adhesions under an anaesthetic.

The bursa is also liable to infective conditions, such as acute
rheumatism, gonorrhoea, suppuration, or tubercle. In tuberculous disease
a large fluctuating swelling may form and acquire the characters of a
cold abscess (Fig. 115).

The bursa underneath the tendon of the _subscapularis_ muscle when
inflamed causes alteration in the attitude of the shoulder and
impairment of its movements.

An adventitious bursa forms over the _acromion_ process in porters and
others who carry weights on the shoulder, and may be the seat of
traumatic bursitis.

The bursa under the _tendon of insertion of the biceps_, when the seat
of disease, is attended with pain and swelling about a finger's breadth
below the bend of the elbow; there is pain and difficulty in effecting
the combined movement of flexion and supination, slight limitation of
extension, and restriction of pronation.

In the lower extremity, a large number of normal and adventitious bursae
are met with and may be the seat of bursitis. That over the _tuberosity
of the ischium_, when enlarged as a trade disease, is known as
"weaver's" or "tailor's bottom." It may form a fluctuating swelling of
great size, projecting on the buttock and extending down the thigh, and
causing great inconvenience in sitting (Fig. 116). It sometimes contains
a number of loose bodies.

There are two bursae over the _great trochanter_, one superficial to, the
other beneath the aponeurosis of the gluteus maximus; the latter is not
infrequently infected by tuberculous disease that has spread from the
trochanter.

The bursa _between the psoas muscle and the capsule of the hip-joint_
may be the seat of tuberculous disease, and give rise to clinical
features not unlike those of disease of the hip-joint. The limb is
flexed, abducted and rotated out; there is a swelling in the upper part
of Scarpa's triangle, but the movements are not restricted in directions
which do not entail putting the ilio-psoas muscle on the stretch.

Cartilaginous and partly ossified loose bodies may accumulate in the
ilio-psoas bursa and distend it, both in a downward direction towards
the hip-joint, with which it communicates, and upwards, projecting
towards the abdomen.

The bursa beneath the quadriceps extensor--_subcrural bursa_--usually
communicates with the knee-joint and shares in its diseases. When shut
off from the joint it may suffer independently, and when distended with
fluid forms a horse-shoe swelling above the patella.

In front of the patella and its ligament is the _prepatellar bursa_,
which may have one, two, or three compartments, usually communicating
with one another. It is the seat of the affection known as "housemaid's
knee," which is very common and is sometimes bilateral, and, less
frequently, of tuberculous disease which usually originates in the
patella.

[Illustration: FIG. 116.--Great Enlargement of the Ischial Bursa.

(Mr. Scot-Skirving's case.)]

The bursa _between the ligamentum patellae and the tibia_ is rarely the
seat of disease. When it is, there is pain and tenderness referred to
the ligament, the patient is unable to extend the limb completely, the
tuberosity of the tibia is apparently enlarged, and there is a
fluctuating swelling on either side of the ligament, most marked in the
extended position of the limb.

Of the numerous bursae in the popliteal space, that _between the
semi-membranosus and the medial head of the gastrocnemius_ is most
frequently the seat of disease, which is usually of the nature of a
simple hydrops, forming a fluctuating egg-or sausage-shaped swelling at
the medial side of the popliteal space. It is flaccid in the flexed, and
tense in the extended position. As a rule it causes little
inconvenience, and may be left alone. Otherwise it should be dissected
out, and if, as is frequently the case, there is a communication with
the knee-joint, this should be closed with sutures.

[Illustration: FIG. 117.--Gouty Disease of Bursae in a tailor. The bursal
tumours were almost entirely composed of urate of soda. (Cf. Fig. 114.)]

An adventitious bursa may form over the _lateral malleolus_, especially
in tailors, giving rise to the condition known as "tailor's ankle"
(Fig. 117).

The bursa _between the tendo-calcaneus (Achillis) and the upper part of
the calcaneus_ may become inflamed--especially as a result of
post-scarlatinal rheumatism or gonorrhoea. The affection is known as
Achillo-bursitis. There is severe pain in the region of the insertion of
the tendo-calcaneus, the movements at the ankle-joint are restricted,
and the patient may be unable to walk. There is a tender swelling on
either side of the tendon. When, in spite of palliative treatment, the
affection persists or relapses, it is best to excise the bursa. The
tendo-calcaneus is detached from the calcaneus, the bursa dissected out,
and the tendon replaced. If there is a bony projection from the
calcaneus, it should be shaved off with the chisel.

The bursa that is sometimes met with on the under aspect of the
calcaneus--_the subcalcanean bursa_--when inflamed, gives rise to pain
and tenderness in the sole of the foot. This affection may be associated
with a spinous projection from the bone, which is capable of being
recognised in a skiagram. The soft parts of the heel are turned forwards
as a flap, the bursa is dissected out, and the projection of bone, if
present, is removed.

The enlargement of adventitious bursae over the head of the first
operation or accidental wounds; and the scars resulting from burns,
metatarsal in hallux valgus; over the tarsus, metatarsus, and digits in
the different forms of club-foot; over the angular projection in Pott's
disease of the spine; over the end of the bone in amputation stumps, and
over hard tumours such as chondroma and osteoma, are described
elsewhere.




CHAPTER XX

